I was diving with the Sea Search Volunteer Survey Group back in 1999, looking at the
seabed to the east of the St. Tudwell's Islands off Abersach in Traumatic Bay when we found
mantis shrimps for the first time.
I've always been interested in sediment burrowing fauna, having looked at mud communities in
Scottish sea lochs, where you regularly find various species of mud burrowing crustaceans,
fish and even giant fireworks and enemies that produce characteristic burrows and tubes.
But I didn't recognise the thumb diameter vertical holes we started to find in the muddy
gravel on that sea search dive.
I couldn't see anything down the burrow, so I poked a finger down and didn't find anything.
Pushing harder into the sediment I could feel that the burrow went vertically down for about
20cm and then levelled off.
I could also see that I was pushing water through the far end of the burrow by the small
plume of silt coming out of an exit about 40cm away.
It was then my ungloved fingers were stabbed by something sharp and shortly after a prawn-like
animal shot out through the silt plume and started running off across the seabed.
I grabbed it, got stabbed a few more times and somehow managed to get it into my sample
bag that I had stowed in my drysuit pocket.
I could now see that what I had in the bag was clearly a mantis shrimp.
It had the characteristic long serrated forelimbs designed to snatch prey animals, very like
those of a praying mantis.
It had two twin lobed compound eyes and a heavily armoured tail.
But what was it doing in this part of Wales?
Back on dry land, the old Hamlin guide described Squilla desmoresti as the best fit for this
species, but the distribution seemed to be limited to the Mediterranean and only as far
north as the English Channel.
Further investigation confirmed that its current scientific name was Rhysoides desmoresti,
and this new record extended its known range much further north and it was also a new record
for Wales.
This news went well beyond the scientific community and the mantis shrimps were even
featured on the national news and mainstream TV.
Since that dive I have been back regularly to get a better idea of its abundance and
distribution.
Once you get your eye in, the burrows are easy to discriminate from the burrows of other
species in the area and you can tell whether they are occupied or not by the intact lining
of fine silt at the entrance.
We found them around much of Cardingham Bay, around the 10-15m depth zone where the suitable
mixture of stable muddy gravel and sand that supports the formation of the burrows.
At their most abundant there is as many as one burrow every 5-10m2, so that's a lot
of mantis shrimps overall in this area.
But until recently I have never seen them occurring naturally out of their burrows.
In 2020 I was lucky enough to be involved in the filming of a natural history programme
about the marine life of Wales, and that included diving at night on the mantis shrimp beds.
In the middle of a warm summer's night we waited on the seabed next to a group of burrows
and watched and filmed them as they emerged.
They are nocturnal.
We saw a couple of animals travelling across the seabed and also tracked one as it disappeared
down a burrow.
But we still don't know whether they leave from and return to the same burrow, or whether
they might even use multiple burrows.
A good excuse to dive this area again at night.